Dispatcher Training Modules:
3 Active Sessions – One practice – 2 Supervised Sessions
(Option for a 3rd supervised if necessary)

Overview

Training Tips:
•	Tell learners what you are going to teach
•	Show learners what they will be learning.
•	Have learners do what they have just learned.
•	Give learners feedback on what they did well and share some ideas for improvement.
•	Repetition is key.  Even if you feel redundant, drive the point home.
•	Encourage the trainees to ask questions.
•	Take a couple 5-10 minute breaks, especially after long periods of explanation.  Keep them interested.  Trainees are being given a great deal of information; we don’t want to overwhelm them.
•	In all training shifts take every opportunity to relate to emergency protocol.
•	Use downtime to pose scenarios and quiz them on what was covered.  Practice, practice, practice.
Evaluation Forms:
•	Feedback should be specific, timely, and focus on observable behaviors.
•	After each training session, please fill out the comments section at the bottom and return to the trainee’s folder.  Check off content covered as you go.
•	Before beginning a training session, please read the comments from the previous training sessions and ensure all of the previous material was covered.  This way you will know what to spend more time on in practice and what they have excelled at.
Giving Helpful Feedback:
•	Focus on observed behavior (not perceptions/impressions)
•	Give specific description of what you heard/saw (avoid judgment)
•	Submit your evaluation forms to the ACDC.
Training Shift Order:
•	Active Sessions 1 and then 2
•	Active Session 3 (Emergency Protocol Training with ACDC, HD, or Officer)
•	Emergency Procedures Practice session.
•	Supervised Sessions 1 and then 2

Active Session 1 – 4 hour shifts
Date:						Shift:
Trainee Name:				Trainer Name:

Office Tour
	Bulletin Boards
	Dispatch Schedule
	Pertinent Dispatcher Forms: forms at the counter; time sheets (finding these on Blackboard/go site if you run out of forms) - show locations and overview, instructions on use will come in supervised sessions.
	Location of log binders.
	TV/DVD/Computer watching/use protocols
	Policies on attire, guests, music, cell phones
	Policies on dispatch computers (no videos/games, downloads, installs, or volume changes)
	Refrigerator use; be courteous; show them their cubby
	Dispatch Area Neatness (using anti-bacterial, wipes, etc.)
	Cleaning Checklist and policies
	Coverage and importance of never leaving the area.  Bathroom requests.

Dispatch Logging/Report Exec
Report Exec
	Using Report Exec
o	How to log in
o	Difference between "New Call" and "Officer Status"
o	How to mark individuals on and off duty - How to change "area"
o	Using the "notes" section to log additional information that does not go into the fields

	What to log
o	Anything that the officer does
o	Any request of the officer to do something that comes in by phone or radio
o	Buildings/locations being checked, secured, or opened
o	Motor vehicle stops: location, vehicle involved, infraction, any other pertinent info.
o	Vehicle tows (also needs to be entered on Tow Log—will be covered separately)
o	Escorts (also on Escort Log—will be covered separately)
o	Trouble Alarms: location of alarm, info from panel, what was done (covered in more detail during Emergency Protocols session)
o	Any phone calls the officer asks you to make (e.g. a student to move vehicle from a 15 min. spot) and a brief description of the status of the call (e.g. spoke directly, left voicemail, no answer)
o	Any complaint or report someone makes of an observation that pertains to the department (example: students hitting golf balls behind Tavilla Hall, someone sitting on top of Frost)
o	Anything else the officer asks you to log.
o	Emergency situations (explain use of incident number/incident system)

Backup Paper Logs
	Have the Trainee get a new log that they will use to copy yours (or the dispatcher on duty if it is not you).  Help them make entries as you discuss Log use.  At the end of the shift they can put their log into the shred box.

	Locations of new and used logs

	First and last entry (relieving / being relieved by)
o	Times should match person you relieve and your relief

	How to log…each entry should include:
o	Name of person making the request
o	Time request is made and location
o	Brief (but complete) description of the request or situation (admit, off with, BOLO, MV Stop, Jump Start, Lockout, Opened, Checked, etc.)
o	Officer or person responding in the disposition column followed by a forward slash (/)



	“Scratch” pads and their protocol and storage
o	Label sections
	Name, Date, Time

Phones
	Confidentiality
o	No personal information can be given out to any individual (officers excluded).
o	If you feel there is an exception, you must obtain duty officer’s authorization to give out information
o	If someone asks why: Inform that this is a standard college policy established by Cabinet for security reasons and that you are NOT authorized to give out personal information.
o	To those who claim to be part of the Gordon community, let them know that community information is available via the People Search function of the Go Site where individuals can determine how private their information is to the Gordon Community.
o	This restriction extends to giving out information available in People Search on the Go Site.  Different information is available for different users and as a community member not all info you see is public.

	Giving out campus numbers
o	Only numbers found in the Alcatel phones or the operator database online.
o	Show how to get both.
o	DO NOT give numbers or connect to numbers found by using the People Search on the go Gordon site or in Master Phone search. This information is restricted.

	Superset Functions
o	Phonebook/lookup
o	Transfer (from speed dial button, internal speed dial, lookup, and direct number dialing)
o	Release
o	Hold
o	Cancel
o	Conference – practice this several times.

	Review each line on Alcatel, what it is, how to answer each, and precedence of each
o	3’s = Emergency Lines (3)
FIRST PRIORITY – should be answered after 1st ring
“Gordon College Emergency Center, this line is recorded.”
o	4’s = Gordon Police Lines
SECOND PRIORITY – should be answered within 2 rings
“Gordon Police, this line is recorded.”
*Someone calling Gordon Police for to be connected to another number – give operator number and have them call.
o	978 – 867- 4000 = Operator
THIRD PRIORITY – should be answered within 4 rings
“Gordon College Operator, this is ________.  How can I help you?”
*Someone may be calling the operator, wanting to be connected to Gordon Police

	Show how multiple lines ring and then select a line.

	Explain the difference between calling in to the operator line (978-927-2300) and direct dialing an extension (978-867-XXXX).

	How to place a person on hold.
o	General call = F1, hold
o	Emergency call = cradle against shoulder or leave line open on counter top (caller should hear the dispatching of the call).
o	“Triaging” calls. Answering calls and putting directly on hold.
o	Picking calls back up from hold (always say: “Thank you for holding.”)

	Cheats
o	Quick reference of various office extensions
o	Various Gordon Police, Physical Plant, and RD listings
o	The At-Hand Binder
o	Using the go-site and www.gordon.edu to find information.

	Speed Dials
o	Regional
o	Officer Line (upstairs)
o	Chief/Lt/ACDC desk phones
o	Duty Cells
o	Officer Cells (listed by badge number)
o	Commonly called P. Plant (M number) Cells.
o	Dispatchers
o	Departments
o	Internal speed dials (show how to get to them when on the line)

	Make emergency lines ring: make internal and external emergency lines ring until they can differentiate between the two.
o	Note: when second call comes in on 3’s, it does not ring the same way as first call.
o	Emphasize the sound of the backup phones ringing over the desktop phones and discuss how the phones will sound if the network is down.

	Differentiating Lines
o	3333 = 3334
o	4444 = 4445
o	Base lines (on left it shows 4449  means when you call out the number is 978-867-4449)

	Review other phones: their purpose and how to answer.
o	Tan “Outside” Emergency Phone
“Gordon College Emergency Center.”
Number = (978) 922-9135
For use during power outage
o	Backup Emergency Phone (Alcatel)
On top of console
For use during network outage
o	Backup Dispatch Phone (Uniden)
On top of console
For use during network outage
Using this phone as a caller ID for past calls

	Explain the caller ID boxes for the emergency lines (E911 – computer, “outside” emergency phone) and how to review
o	Explain the practice of trying to call back Emergency line hang-ups and notifying the officer when no one answers.
o	E911 – top computer.  Will be a box with a red banner that reads “911 Call Alert”.
	For an on campus line it will give the name, number, and zone (showing location).
	For an off campus line it will have only the cellphone number.
•	Name will say Windstream 1, zone will say default.   It will say Calling from 255 Grapevine Rd Wenham, MA 01984, however not necessarily location.
	Difference between campus phones dialing 3333 or 911.  Listen Only Mode.  How to handle listen only 911 calls.

	Protocols for Off-campus Residences
o	Hull Street (#5, #26)	Treated as “home” number, do not give out, do not connect
o	Dexter House		Permitted to give this out to callers with a campus
 				extension. To outside callers, do not give out, do not connect.

	Calls for the Officer
o	Always get the name of the calling party
o	If someone calls for the primary officer, radio them to ask if they are available to take a call.
o	Never take a message for an officer who is working—unless you are instructed to do so.
o	If someone calls for a specific officer, first ask the primary officer if that person is currently on campus. (If they are on-campus, attempt to radio directly, ask if they can receive a call).
o	If the requested person is confirmed not on campus, ask the caller if the primary officer can assist them.
o	If the primary officer cannot help them, offer to transfer them to the officer's voicemail (only if for 101, 102, or 110) or ask them to email the officer. 

Scripts for Common Phone Situations
Operator Line - “Someone called me from this number,” “This number was on my caller ID,” etc.
	“I’m sorry, you’ve reached the Gordon College Operator. All phones for our campus dial out through this number. There is no way to trace specifically who called. Is there someone here at the college that we can connect you to?”

Caller has a NON-Emergency Purpose on the EMERGENCY Line…
	“This is the dedicated Emergency line for Gordon Police, would you please call on our General Business Line 978-867-4444 for routine requests in the future?  Please hold while I transfer you to the business line so that we can keep this line free in case of an emergency.”

Caller asks for Gordon Police from Gordon main line (Operator Line)
	“Let me transfer you to the Gordon Police, 4444.”

Caller asks to be connected with a person/department/extension from the Police line (4444)
	“Let me give you the main number for the college (978) 927-2300. There is an operator available there 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.”

Once the Phones section is completed, have the trainee take over answering the phones and take the call from them in the case of an emergency call.

Computer (note: MV related handled during session 2)
	Review basic program navigation
o	Opening if program closes
o	Where user names and passwords are kept
o	“Less is more” (partial searches)
o	How name search provides quick overview, but specific functions provide greater detail
	Searching Quick listings
	Searching Master Phone
	Searching Master Permission
o	How to look up
o	What to do if none is listed (NO MATTER WHAT always radio the Primary Officer)
o	Where to look for un-entered permissions and when to check there.
	Searching Lost and Found (also check the Lost & Found Check-In Log)
	Logging Incidents (how, when to initiate on your own prior to officer direction)
	Officer In/Out Board and the Admin. Next In Board
	Links (directions, snow removal, etc.)
Shift Change Policy/Procedure
	Explain the steps to shift change.
	Arrive 10 minutes before your shift
	What to do when your relief is late (not here at the start of the shift)
	The importance of passing along relevant information from your shift (who is the primary officer?).
	Making sure you don’t leave (or let someone leave) with any un-labeled items on the desk.
	Is the red “WARNING” sign posted on the fire computer?  Which building is offline?  Why offline?  Ignoring everything or reduced response?
Intercom
	How to use the intercom at both Rodger and Woodland.
	Have them converse with someone at both locations.
	Raising the gates at both locations.
	Never deny access, only delay and gather info to give to the officer if something is off.
Door Buzzer
	Having Rodger secured during the over night shift
	Be cautious at night
	Use the mirror and/or cameras
	Play door buzzer sound, have them practice admitting someone
Session 1 Evaluation:

How is the trainee’s understanding of Report Exec and logging?



How are the trainee’s phone skills?



How is the trainee’s understanding of the computer uses?



Did you observe any major red flag issues?



Where does the trainee need to focus practice on the most?



Where has the trainee excelled or needed very little instruction?



Overall comments and Observations:





Active Session 2 – 4 hour shift
Radio
Date:						Shift:
Trainee Name:				Trainer Name:

For this training session, trainees should answer the phone lines to practice what was learned in the last session.  If an emergency comes in, simply take over.

	Have the Trainee get a new log that they will use to copy yours (or the dispatcher on duty if it is not you).  Help them make entries as you discuss Log use.  At the end of the shift they can put their log into the shred box.
	Basic radio transmission
o	transmission methods
o	Repeater and delay (hold down the button). Drill with a portable radio so they can hear.
o	Using the back-up radio if console fails.  Both portable and box unit.
o	Refrain from using names over the air, unless specifically asked by officer (standing exception is a phone call specifically for an officer by name where a name on the radio is not only allowed but expected)
o	What to transmit (no one ever calls to inform you (the dispatcher) of anything).  Always pass on info to the officer.  Never make decisions except when specific policy dictates.
o	The officer is in charge.

	Radio Channels
o	Channel 3 = Gordon Police
o	Alternate
	Channel 1 = Physical Plant – rarely used
	Channel 2 = for extended conversation (mostly used by Physical Plant) – rarely used
	Channel 4 = if repeater fails, transmits directly to officers’ radios, use this ONLY if instructed to do so.  Both officer and dispatcher must be on the same channel.

	How to change channels
o	Console
o	Box unit – explain that this is the second line on the console and once changed can also be used from there.

	Simu-select
o	Do repeatedly to get feel for it
o	Select off of it
o	When to use (such as announcements like lightning strike alerts)

	Scanners: Volume controls and rules
o	Keep “Select” knob at 1/3rd volume.  Keep “Unselect” knob at around 1/4 volume.
o	ALL channels must always be heard—including local scanner volume
o	Why we listen to the Wenham scanner
o	BOLOs. – Make sure the officer hears them.  Put only on BOLO board if the officer instructs you to, all others scratch pad for your temporary reference.  Any BOLO on the board must be on a sticky note with your name, the reason for the BOLO (i.e. vehicle reported stolen), the date, the time, and the approving officer’s badge number.

	Emergency tones
o	What each is used for
o	Test each one for them to hear (notify channels 1 & 3 before doing so)
o	Officer portable radio emergency alert and how to respond
o	Dispatcher Panic Button – both activating and clearing.  When to use, when not to use.

	Basic radio protocols
o	Address: Person being called from person calling (“106 from Control”. Remind about delay)
o	Responding to an officer call (“go ahead 106” – use their number).
o	Importance of being both professional and efficient
o	Names (confidentiality)
o	10 Codes
o	Military alphabet
o	Repeating Information (confirms call was heard correctly)
o	Providing the time in your receipt of a call
o	“Stand-by”

	Speaking on the radio
o	Only 1 person can be heard at a time (clear and concise)
o	Plan what you say before you key the radio
o	Enunciate (the radio distorts)
o	If you are ever unsure what has been said ask for the info. to be repeated (don’t assume you understood)

	Radio designations
Gordon Police
o	Control (Dispatcher)
o	101-109 (Officers)
o	110 (ACDC)
o	121-124 (Student Openers)
o	201-210 (Student Parking Enforcers
o	125 (Access Control Assistant)
o	D1 and D2 (Head Dispatcher(s))

Physical Plant
o	Base (Physical Plant Office)
o	Mobile numbers (abbreviate when writing, i.e. “Mobile One” = M1 = Director of Physical Plant; listed on cheat sheet)

Student Openers
o	Carry radios and call in after they open each building
o	Log each building after they open it
o	Include times in your radio replies to openers
o	Will check out keys from the box.  They are not exempt from leaving an ID.

Student Parking Enforcers
o	Checking out iPad, cite box, and radio
o	Never clarifying to the public whether or not a student wrote a cite (as far as they are concerned it is only ever the officer).
o	Passing on special one-time parking permissions for their shift.

Student Closers
o	Similar to student openers.

	At this point the trainee should start taking over radio transmissions to apply their knowledge.

MV Listings & Stops
	How to Search in Master Car
o	How to decipher current student status and resident/commuter status in Master Car.

	Stops and Listings are initially handled in the same way
o	Write down and repeat back to officer to confirm that you heard it properly.
o	What to do if a search does not return results.

	Response the same: “10--” from Control with your listing
o	Wait for the go ahead before reading the listing (wait time will be longer on a stop)
o	Read straight across the columns that are marked in the system (provide additional information only as directed)
o	Demonstrate and have them practice reading vehicle listings appropriately.

	Driver history
o	Click on the listing to be taken to the complete vehicle record
o	Only include history from the current school year, unless the officer requests more.
o	When listing the history, indicate the number (code) of the infraction, whether it was a warning or a citation and the location
o	If the history is extensive, it can be summarized (i.e. multiple number 20s in the Tavilla Lot)

	MV Listing written on scratch pad (not on log)

	MV Stop = proper way to Log entry
o	Dangerous situation for the officer – they are your priority.
o	Status checks.

	Printing a listing:
o	Need to be in the extended vehicle information screen (where you can see the history)
o	Print icon is at top of page
o	Always circle the plate number or sticker number for the vehicle involved
o	How to process a Verbal Warning or listing changes (should be placed in the data entry bin unless you are otherwise instructed by the officer

Issuing MV Passes
	How to issue a Visitor Pass (have them create one for Joe Dispatcher)

	How to issue a Temporary Pass (Student and Staff)
o	What do when length of time needed is longer than 7 days.
o	Emphasize: students who already have a registered car on campus will NOT be charged the $5 fee
o	Staff passes = Free  (if they want one for more than 4 weeks, suggest they register the car)

	How to handle request for Temporary Handicap Privileges

Campus Parking Information
	Where to find Parking and Driving Regulations for campus (on Go site) – Most questions can be satisfied by referring inquiries there.
	Be careful to not answer questions with your own prior misconceptions.
	Policy for where “unattended” vehicles are to be parked (Woodland Lot)
	What to do when someone says they can’t find a legal space to park in.
	Never guess or give approval for parking without checking with the officer
o	Example: Visitor rushes in and says “I’m just going to leave my car here for an hour.”  If you say “OK” they see this as the police gave them permission (make them wait and check with the officer).
	If you are ever unsure about how to answer someone with a parking questions ALWAYS radio the Duty Officer.  Never Guess!

Gates
	Review how to operate the gate buttons and intercom at both Rodgers and Woodland
o	Use lights (green/red) as the indication for whether gate is up/down (camera for Woodland)

	Play alert beep and have officer call from the woodland gate so they can differentiate the sounds.

	When gates are raised and lowered each day
o	By officer direction (when they call the Chapel and Ferrin gates closed or opened).
o	General times: 2200 (lowered); 0600 (raised)
o	Woodland Gate is automatically closed from 1800-0600

	Looking for stickers at night (outside light) and expiration dates on temp/visitor passes
o	Very old faculty/staff permits are square and in rear windows

	Line of questioning at night for Rodgers if there is NO registration sticker.
o	“Hello. Are you a current student?”
o	NOTE: If he or she is clearly not a student (middle-aged or elderly), you can ask if he or she is a faculty or staff member.
•	Persist until “YES” or “NO” reply
o	IF YES: “Is there a reason why the vehicle isn’t registered?”
•	Ask them to pull into one of the DPS spots and come in to obtain: sticker, temporary pass/visitor pass.
o	IF NO: “What is the reason for your visit?”
•	Get name of host
•	Run name to confirm this is an enrolled student.
•	“Will the vehicle be on be on campus overnight?”
o	If yes, ask them to pull into one of the DPS spots and come in to obtain a visitor pass.
o	If no, wish them a good night
o	IF FACULTY/STAFF: Simply get their name, let them know there is no charge to register their card and receive a vehicle permit. They can register any time.
o	In all cases they will be admitted.
	If they refuse to register for no good reason or otherwise tickle your spidey senses, let the officer know and get the plate from the entry camera to give the officer.

	Line of questioning at night for Woodland.
o	“Good evening, are you a current student?
o	IF YES: Please give me your ID number? (pull up in the system)
o	“What’s your name?” (Match against listing you just pulled up)
o	IF NOT A STUDENT OR FAC/STAFF:
	 Ask the visitor for his or her reason for wanting to enter Woodland.
	Inform the officer of the situation.
	Do not deny entry to the visitor, but notify the officer of your suspicion right away.
	Continue to monitor the vehicle on the Woodland cameras and report any suspicious activity to the duty officer.

	Usefulness of keeping the intercom on while studying at night.

	What to do in “suspicious” situations.
o	Do NOT deny entry
o	Do stall
o	Gather detailed info. (description of vehicle and occupants)
o	Radio Officer

	At this point the trainee can take over the gate and intercom for the rest of the shift to practice.

Cameras
	Full Screen view: Open from the tree to the left.  Double click ONLY with fixed cameras that do not pan/tilt/zoom.
	Returning to the default screens
	Moving the cameras (pan tilt and zoom)
	Finding recent history (expand the camera in the tree to the left)
	Show how to start SENTRY VMS if it ever shuts down (username and password in the drawer).
	Fixing Layout – 1st opened should be dispatch 3!
	Using the Joystick – not required but optional
	Occasionally the IP cameras lose connection, but often reconnect on their own.
o	If a camera is down and does not come back up on your shift:
	Try rebooting the computer and software.
	If the problem persists, email a ticket to CTS and copy the ACDC on the email.
	If the cameras ever go down—notify the officer or ACDC immediately




Session 2 Evaluation:

How are the trainee’s radio skills?



How is the trainee’s understanding of stops and listings?



How is the trainee’s understanding of the gates and cameras?



Did you observe any major red flag issues?



Where does the trainee need to focus practice on the most?



Where has the trainee excelled or needed very little instruction?



Overall comments and Observations:


Active Session 3: Emergency Procedures Training – 4-5 hour shift (with ACDC or Lieutenant)
Date:						Shift:
Trainee Name:				Trainer Name:

	Review:  Motor Vehicle Stop
	Discuss importance of knowing where the officer is, “out with” calls etc.
	Radio panic alarms – demonstrate one and how to clear on our radio and the officers’ radio
	What to do if you lose contact with the officer
	Backup systems for power out
o	Backup phones
o	Backup radio and how to use
o	How to use a portable radio
o	Off campus emergency line and importance in major power/storm events
	Describe what each type of event is in the fire system:
o	Fire Alarm
o	Local Alarm/Pre Alarm
o	Trouble Alarm
o	Supervisory (like trouble alarms but relating to power issues)
o	Wilson house security alarm
	Device/Zone disabled
o	Discuss what to do when this happens and why
o	Discuss the need to know why and the two different ways that alarms are handled when disabled.  (officer responds to check without tone when the alarm is off due to work in the area but not on the system – such as welding, spraying, steam, sanding…etc.)
	Show how to read the old fire computer and how to use the node/zone numbers
	Show how to reset the system when asked
	Show how to read and use the primary fire computer.
o	Importance of double clicking and reading from the bottom
o	Buildings that come in through other buildings – reading second line
o	Checking to ensure there is only one alarm (reading the system summary /alarm count)
	Review and practice initiating a conference call, muting
	Refresh the location and sound of tones
	Three key information pieces to get from every emergency phone call: Call back number (confirm), specific location, briefly what is the situation.
	Report of Fire/Visible Smoke  protocol
	Fire Alarm – standard protocol
	Fire Alarm – local (system local, non-system local, and pre-alarm) protocol
	Report of local smoke detector activation - protocol
	Trouble Alarm (remind that these get logged) (Supervisory Alarms and what they are)
	Bennett Security Alarm – One specific supervisory, specific protocol
	10-7 E: Dispatcher Distress – 10-7 Immediately
o	Dispatcher Panic Buttons
	Medical Aid protocol
	Person Stuck in Elevator (Use medical protocol but with obvious word changes)
	10-34P Psychological Emergency/Suicide protocol
	10-35 Police Emergency
	10-50 Well Being Check
	Bomb Threat protocol
	How to handle a Fire Alarm in Rodger
	Review how to use/read the e911 caller ID.  How to know when this system is offline.
	Alertus alerts:
o	As part of  Blackboard Connect system
o	Panic Alarms
o	Bennett Pool alarm (worded for Bennett staff not dispatch and can be confusing)
	Treat as a Medical emergency possible drowning
	Give detailed instructions for what to do when we are called in our capacity as the Emergency Contact for the Counseling Center. (The really weird calls)
	Explain the alarms that come via external companies:
o	The Bookstore,
o	The Barrington Gallery
o	The Growth Chamber in KOSC
o	216 Grapevine
o	Temperature alarms/power alarms (call recordings)
o	Fire alarms for external buildings (i.e. Dexter, 26 Hull St.)
	An actual alarm is always a live person calling.
	Trouble alarms can sound like live alarms
o	**The main thing to remember is that ANY TIME you receive a call regarding any alarm you should get the name of the person calling and the location and nature of the alarm and relay this information to the Duty Officer immediately (if possible, keep the caller on the line in case the officer has a follow-up question he or she wants answered). The officers will follow up appropriately. While these types of alarms are rare occurrences, the protocol for handling them is fairly simple and straightforward.
Send the Trainee home with printed copies of the emergency procedures protocol sheets to study in advance of the practice session.

Session 3 Evaluation:

Overall Comments and Observations:






Comment on memory recall from previous training sessions:



Practice Session: Emergency Procedures Practice – 2-3 hour shift (not during the trainer’s dispatch shift)
Date:						Shift:
Trainee Name:				Trainer Name:

	The purpose of this practice session is to have as many dedicated practice “emergencies” as possible while not also juggling the other office duties.
	The trainee should have had at least a day after the emergency procedures training to study and review the content discussed in that training session.
	Walk the trainee through scenarios of each of the key emergency protocols, not explaining it but prompting them for the appropriate responses.  Make noises or observations for them as necessary.
	Have the Trainee get a new log that they will use to log the practice emergencies.  Watch them to make sure they understand how to log these events.  At the end of the shift they can put their log into the shred box.
	Have them go through the motions as well as simply describing what they would do for muscle memory (i.e. pointing at the tone they would press, pushing their finger on the table next to the radio transmission button, finding the speed dials in the phones…etc.)
	For calls that would be transferred to regional, use the back office phone, operator line, and/or your cell to allow them to physically complete a conference call for the simulation without actually calling regional.
o	Fire Alarms
o	Report of Fire or Smoke
o	Medicals
o	Psychological Emergencies
o	Well Being Check
o	Local Fire Alarms
o	Security Alarm (various locations or income methods)
o	Officer in Distress
o	Bomb Threats
o	Trouble Alarms
o	Vehicle Stops
o	Throw in a random emergency that doesn’t fit any of the previous protocols to help them think through applying the protocols they do know to a new situation.
o	Two emergencies at once as an advanced drill toward the end
	Repeat with new scenarios until they get it without questions or corrections.

Session 3 Evaluation:

Overall Comments and Observations:






Comment on memory recall from previous training sessions:



Trainee’s areas of strength:


Where does the trainee still need more practice?



Any Red Flags?



Supervised Session 1: Service – 4 hour shift
Date:						Shift:
Trainee Name:				Trainer Name:

**Reminder: notify Duty Officer immediately that this is a supervised shift. If at all possible, we would like them to run a Live Emergency Drill at some point during the shift.  They may also have other ideas of situations they can conjure to give them practice.

	Practice, practice, practice: putting the active components together
	Remember to have trainee be the one “on duty”, covering both the phone and the radio
	Do not step in to cover during busy periods, allow them to learn to handle multiple requests at once.
	Do not supply them with answers that they can find on their own, help them learn where to look to find answers.
	The only time you should jump in to take over is if they are seriously botching something with life or death ramifications.  Learning happens from mistakes.
	Your primary role when supervising is to help them be ready to work on their own.

	Conduct a thorough review of phone use/protocols
	Explain: what to do if their relief is late (5 min +)
TRAIN:
	Blackboard
o	Finding forms, information, printing documents, checking discussion boards/open shifts, calendar, announcements, etc.
o	GO OVER SHIFT COVERAGE PROCEDURE.
	Email Policy – key information by email.  Must reply to all department emails within 24 hours of sending (check daily).
	Van Testing – process, receiving/filing applications
	OCE Vehicles Procedures
	RAD
	Parking Violation Petitions
	Escort Log
o	Make sure they know where to find the separate escort log.
o	Clarify what info goes on General Dispatch log and Escort Log
	Campus Awareness
	Admissions Guests
	Wilson House Guests
	Parking/Event Details
	Physical Plant Work Orders (remind the ACDC if the trainee hasn’t been given access to department work requests.
	Directing/receiving deliveries after-hours
	ID Box for Shovels, Scrapers and Equipment
	Items and Notes
o	Always with initials, date and time.
o	Every Item on the counter must have a note.
o	Refer people to the ACDC’s email or voicemail or email the ACDC with a message from someone in the office, do not leave notes on sticky notes for the ACDC.


Supervised Session 1 Evaluation:

Comment on Trainee’s ability to apply their training (memory and retention):


What needs more work/practice?


What do they have down solid?


Are there any red flags?


General Comments about their progress or any other specific points:

Supervised Session 2: Protocol – 4 hour shift
Date:						Shift:
Trainee Name:				Trainer Name:

**Reminder: notify Duty Officer immediately that this is a supervised shift. If at all possible, we would like them to run a Live Emergency Drill at some point during the shift.  They may also have other ideas of situations they can conjure to give them practice.

	Practice, practice, practice putting the active components together.
	When it is slow, create scenarios for them to think through the appropriate response or quiz them on policy and protocol.
	Remember to have trainee be the one “on duty”, covering both the phone and the radio
	Conduct a thorough review of Gate Protocol (AS – 2)
	Review Camera use (AS – 2)
o	Ask them to find several things on the cameras to practice
	Scanners—make sure trainee knows how to adjust the volume (stress: that they must always be audible)  (AS – 2)
	Review: MV/listings and stops; show trainee how to issue a verbal warning. (AS – 2)
	Review: temporary and visitor passes (AS – 2)
TRAIN:
	Vehicle Registration
o	Explain the difference in forms
o	Explain protocols for fac/staff, residents, commuters & grad students (not billed by our dept., but issued commuter pass).
	Bike Registration
o	Location of cards and stickers
o	How to locate serial numbers
	Absentee Parking
	Keys for campus workers and outside contractors (box on wall)
	Key Returns
o	Location of Return Key Log and Key Box
o	Reminder: we do NOT accept Residence Hall Keys
	Admin Next In
	Receiving Mail – take out of intercampus mail envelopes and sort into mail boxes.  Sometimes you can handle it (such as a van test application or similar).
	Vehicle and Bike Tow Logs
o	Make sure they know where to find the tow log
o	How to handle an individual saying their car/bike has disappeared (before treating it as stolen, check the tow logs)
o	If the bike was towed, the party must get a receipt for the $15 fee at the cashier’s window.  Give them the slip to take to the cashier with the account#.
o	Vehicle tow fines are written on a citation.
	Receiving/Logging Lost and Found; processing claimed items
Stress that no lost and found items should be left on the counter.  All are tagged and processed.

Supervised Session 2 Evaluation:

Comment on Trainee’s ability to apply their training (memory and retention):


Does anything need more work/practice?


What do they have down solid?


Are there any red flags?


General Comments about their progress or any other specific points:



In your opinion, is this trainee ready to Dispatch on their own?  Yes        No
	If no, please email the ACDC before leaving saying this and why.

Supervised Session 3: Refreshers – 4 hour shift (if necessary)
Date:						Shift:
Trainee Name:				Trainer Name:

**Reminder: notify Duty Officer immediately that this is a supervised shift. If at all possible, we would like them to run a Live Emergency Drill at some point during the shift.  They may also have other ideas of situations they can conjure to give them practice.

•	The 3rd Supervised shift is the time for tying up any loose ends.  Take a look at the past evaluations of the dispatcher in training to determine the points of emphasis for this shift.

REFRESHER IDEAS:
•	Vehicle Registration (residents, commuters, faculty/staff)
•	Physical Plant Work Orders
•	Receiving Mail
•	Blackboard items (especially the shift coverage board and policy)
•	Directing/receiving deliveries
•	Phone lines/answering & forwarding calls
•	OCE vehicle sign out
•	External Alarm Calls
•	ID box for shovels, scrapers, and equipment use
•	Detailed description of shift change procedure and policy
•	Answering any and all questions by the trainee.
•	ENCOURAGE MANY QUESTIONS!

Supervised 3 Evaluation:

Is this trainee ready to dispatch on their own?  If no, why not?




		If no, please also email or call the ACDC to inform them so.
